The war in Mexico? Thank you. Sit down.
And your name is? Severino Medina. Yes. Severino
Medina. And where in Mexico are you from?
Bustamante, Tamaulipas. Yes. Bustamante,
Tamaulipas. And in what year? In what year were you
in the war? Yes. Yes? I was three years in the war.
Three years? Three years. In 13, 14, and 15. In 15 I
was separated. That year my grandfather was born.
He was a boy. His name is Severino. A woman called
him Velo because he talked to him and I answered.
His name is Severino too. He lives here. And
you are from here? Yes, I am. I am from here. And your
people? From Texas. What's your father's name?
Russell. He lives in Huntsville, close to here. He
lives close to here, but he lives nearby. Tell him
about what you had in the battlefield. Yes, I had in
the battlefield... I was on horseback. My mother
was on foot, but I was on horseback. They
say that... They say that... They say that... They
say that... They say that... They say that... A
Mauser 30-30. I had three cabins, 30-32 and a
Mauser. Well, the saber you have, is it from there?
The saber? No, it's a big knife. It's a saber.
It's from the last war. Oh, from Germany? Germany.
He has a German sword. His son doesn't have a sword.
But I saw a German sword and he said it was from
Germany. My two sons were there. They were there.
They were in the war. In 1942. In Germany and in
Italy. And in Italy. They were in the war. But he was
in the Revolution of Mexico. Yes. How old were you
when you got married? I was 28. You were 28 when the
war broke out? Yes. How many children did you have?
28. You were 28. I got married when I was 16.
And he went to the war for three years? Yes, he went
to the war for three years. There is his portrait
when he was 30 years old. Now he is 92 years old. He is
going to turn 18 in February. In February he turns
92 years old. I was born on the 9th of this year. I was
born on the 9th of this year. I was born on the 9th of
this year. I was born on the 9th of this year. I was
born on the 9th of this year. I was born on I am
satisfied. Since I was born, I have been taken care
of and they are still taking care of me. Tell us
about the man who was shot in the throat. Tell us
about the man who was shot in the throat. What was
his name? The man who was shot in the throat? Yes,
the man who was shot in the throat with the bullet
that you took from him. Oh, I don't remember. What
was his name? He was suffocating himself with the
blood. He was suffocating himself. So he sucked
the hole. I bit him like this and he hit me. And the
blood clot came out. I don't remember what the
man's name was. Yes. Oh, that's bad. He said it was
bad. He said he had blood clots and he was burning.
So he pricked the hole so that the blood would come
out, the blood clots. And then the man could cough
and other men came and took him away. Much later he
saw him. He said, Medina, Medina, I am me. And he
lived? He lived. He was cured. He lived, right? He
didn't die, he lived. No, he didn't die. Then they
talked to him and he looked at me and said, oh,
Medina. He said, you healed me. I said, no, the
others saw that... Did you know what the cause of
the war was? What was it that they fought for? Why
did they fight? It was the Carrancitas
government. Carrancistas. Carrancistas. Dice
que el gobierno eran los federales y los civiles
eran ellos, los civiles. Entonces los civiles se
peleaban con el gobierno federal porque el
gobierno federal no les ayudaba a los pobres. Ni
ponía buenos precios del trabajo, ni buenos
trabajos, sino que el gobierno tenía todo
controlado. Y entonces dice que si usted tenía...
He had a house here, and he had a son, and his son made
a mistake, so his son was sent, they cut his hair and
sent him as a slave to serve the government by
force. Also the women, if not the beautiful women,
they didn't want to go with the men, so the
government sent them to take him to the husband, to
take him and leave him to the woman. So the
civilians saw that the government was taking a lot
of power, a lot of power. So they said, no, we're
going to fight the government to teach them that we
want equality. And that's why the war broke out,
because they said they paid, how much did they pay
you a day? The ones who paid the most were 2 reales.
They paid 25 cents. They paid 18 cents. 18 cents and
20 cents. For work in the fields, in the
agriculture, where there were shepherds taking
care of the flocks and everything. That was what
they paid, 18 cents all day. They said they had a lot
of family, they couldn't live with 25 cents. They
couldn't live. But if you went and complained to
them, He would grab something and hit him. And if he
didn't, he would be sent to be stripped of all his
hair and put on the chaco, or whatever it's called,
the iron hat, and serve the government by force.
And then those soldiers would come to hurt the
civilians. They would come. And then the
civilians would say, no, we are going to fight the
government until they give us We want a democratic
government, a democracy, equality for all
people. That's what he has said many times. And
then, how did he meet General Cardenas? What was
his name? Alberto Cardenas. You fought against
the Carrancistas. Carrancistas were from the
government, and Alberto Huerta was a general. But
he was against the Guest. They were the same ones.
That one was called Alberto Huerta? Alberto
Carrera. Carrera, Carrera. And Pancho Carrera,
they were two brothers. They were two brothers who
ran, they were civilians, but they got together a
lot of men and said, let's fight the government.
And they took away their guns, they took
everything away, and they fought the same
government until... They were able to conquer it.
I have my father. He was also with the general. The
story goes that General Alberto González... In
which part of Mexico? In the same place where my
father fought. Bustamante? He
lives
in
the state of Oklahoma. He got it. He was a...
Teniente,
like a lieutenant. But he was for Pancho Villa. He
was a villista. Yeah, he was a villista, my papa.
And every time we deal with talking like that, he
said, I'm a soldier from Villa. And he was a
villista. He revealed the same story. The same
story. But a carrancista. A carrancista and a
villista. But they were against the government.
Yes. Against the government. In the first days,
Villa and Carranza were together. Until later,
they persecuted Villa because Villa did a lot of
bad things afterwards. Yes. There were a lot of...
But the people of his father were... It was the
state of Coahuila. I was born over there. I was born
in the state of Coahuila. There were many men who
brought women with them. And they gave us the order
to walk from one place to another on the trains. And
they had little boys and girls. When did the war
end? When did the trains end? When they took over
the village. The general who was in charge of the
government.
I don't remember his name. So... My father met the
famous Felipe Angeles. My father knew him. My
father knew him. He said that he would put his eye
like this and he would throw this bullet into the
cannon. My father says that he was a good shooter.
But they say that they fought and fought and
fought, but then all the federal troops got on a
train. They were the only ones who had trains, they
didn't have any. But someone said, now that
everyone is coming on the train, we're going to
release a crazy machine. And it's a cannon, right?
A canyon, what you call a canyon. That's where the
two trains collapsed. He talks. Tell him how the
women were doing. Yes. How what? How the women were
dead. No, not dead. The children. The children, I
mean the children. They were under the trains.
Hacían unas cunas grandes, mira, y ahí tío estuvo.
Under the train they made a cradle and then the
women with the babies got in there. And the trains
full of horses. The horses up and the women stuck
down. Inside the wagons and all the soldiers up.
And the soldiers straight up. The horses in the
middle and the women straight down from the train.
All over,
crawling.
Protected. Protected. They wanted her mama, but
her mama was dead. They said it was a terrible
death. They said any word, any word in any language
is bad. He saw all that. ¿Qué pasó con los niños?
Dice que todo el gobierno los recogió y los puso en
un lugar para que los crean. Todos los quitaron.
Hay donde yo anduve a Pachihuahua. Chihuahua.
Yes, Chihuahua. The orphanage. The orphanage in
Chihuahua. That's where they sent the children.
And a lot of injured people, too, who were injured.
They took them to Chihuahua. They sent them there.
Yes. There was nothing there. I remember that the
forces were taking care of everything. And, oh,
what to see. There were times when you didn't sleep
at all. All night I didn't sleep. Nor did I eat.
Because there was nothing to eat. But they shoot
all night, once against each other, once against
each other. They don't know how many they killed.
But it wasn't that war. They say it was a terrible
war. And he says that all wars are the same. The most
advantageous now is when you get a grenade and
boom, it's uglier. He says the most advantageous
war now is uglier because he says that the men would
fight each other to kill each other. And he says
that now they throw one and kill many. In masses. In
masses, yes. They kill many. He says that a war is
ugly. Yes, he said he was very happy. But he didn't,
because he said he was 92 years old and he was
married to his grandmother. He only had three
months left to be 64 years married to his
grandmother, to his wife. I thought all the time,
to put a portrait in the press, you know, and to be
able to tell people that this man has seen things.
Yes. And well, and then that, but it doesn't seem
like anyone had listened to me, and I think, at
least to publish it, to say that he knows all these
things. Yes. He knows because he walked in those
mountains. Yes. He had experience. He had
experience, yes. He says that boy was shot and the
bullet went through his body. The blood, he says, I
have tasted the blood. The blood is like salty.
Salty. Salty. Salty blood. Well, in which states
were you during the war? In which states of Mexico?
Where was I in Mexico? In which town? Did you live in
Bustamante? In Bustamante. Bustamante. No, in a
ranch in La Joya. A ranch. A ranch in La Joya
Herrera. It's in Bustamante. It's a dark place.
And on the other side it's still there. And a house
that my father built for me. He says it's a stone
house that he left there because he ran away and
never came back. Never? Never came back. One of his
nephews was right that one of his nephews lived in
the house. It's a stone house, but he says he never
came back. And his children, as they were created
here in the United States, they have never done
anything to take him. They say, no, dad, let all
that be forgotten. But I tell you that they should
have taken him to a story so that he could look at his
house and everything. And they say that they don't
want to bring him sadness because he says that he's
going to see the house that his father built for
him. And he says that he thinks that his father left
him money in the house, right? Yes. He was a little
boy, but he says that he looked where his father put
money. Yes. And he's in the house of stone like
that, right? Yes. And they would look at the fire to
get out of the fire. And they would say, no, I don't
have any money. But yes. And how many children
did you have then? How many boys did you have? How
many children did you have? When the war started.
When the war started. They killed me. Didn't you
have Achille or Palermo? I had Achille. Palemón,
Fernando, Severino, and Julio. And
my husband. My husband was a little baby. He's over
there at my house. Where did your family live
during the war? Where did my mother-in-law live
when the war broke out? She stayed at the ranch. At
my house. She stayed at the ranch. My mother died
and I was left alone, as I am in Victoria. How old
were you when your mother died? 7 years. 7 years or
14 years? When my father died, I was 7. And when my
father died, my mother died. And I was left alone
with an aunt of mine here in this side of Victoria,
in El Carmel. In El Carmel. And she took care of me
over there. She says she was 14 years old when she
left. She was a little orphan who didn't have a
child. She said she slept with some thugs. Yes. She
said she slept with the thugs in Pinpeg because she
didn't have a child. In a big house that was there.
It was a very big house. They had to run the marranas
because it was raining, it was cold, they came and
they got wet. And we also... He says there were
seven boys. There were a lot of orphans, also
sleeping with the boys. Yes, so that they could get
warm, because it was hot and cold, and there was no
one. He says he was 14 years old when he was
deported. He says he got married at the age of 16.
Yes. And then, after he had five children, five
boys, he went to war. And he says his wife stayed
there. She didn't have a government check or
anything. Nothing, he just stayed with what his
father gave him or when he could come and leave him
something. In what way did they live? They didn't
pay anyone. The government wasn't against them.
No, there was no government. There was no
government. They had no government or nothing.
They just lived. They lived like, kill and get
killed. It was everything. It was a very ugly
revolution. brothers with brothers because they
were all the same, Mexicans, they killed each
other. But the foundation of the war and the reason
was because of that, because they fought for the
right, that they wanted equality, they didn't
want the people of the government to have enough
and the poor to have nothing. That's how they
conquered the government. Later on, one of the
generals called the people and said, Sirs, he
didn't hurt anyone as he said. He said he was
abhorring the clergy. The respect for other
people's rights is peace. It was written by this
man that he spoke to. There will be no federalists,
maderistas or carrancistas. We will all be the
same. And we will all work together and we will have
schools to educate our children. Until all of that
happened. Then they came back and said, we are
killing each other. And we made the same blood. The
same blood. Then they realized that those wars
were not good. Then they started... This general
spoke to the public and told them. Yes. Well, in
what year? He came with his family to the United
States. What year? What year did he come to the
United States? No, the 18th, no? The 18th. The 18th
of 1919. Yes, and for what reason? He says, for what
reason did he come? After the war, there was a lot of
robberies. A lot of robbers. A lot of robbers. A lot
of robbers to steal because there was no
government. They would come here and take away the
carabiner. If they didn't have money they would
take everything away. And with the bed,
everything. Everything was taken away.
Everything. So, once he went to... They went to a
court to judge a man who had a misunderstanding. He
was a witness. They took him and the lawyer asked
him why he came. He said, I ran away to protect my
family. He ran away because they didn't let him
sleep. He said he was very sick. The thief came and
did this to him, he took him out and left him lying on
the floor. During these years, 1917, 1917, 1917,
1916, 1915, the war started in 1909, right? The war
started in 1909, 1910, 1911, 1912, 1913, 1914,
1915, 1916, 1917,
and 1918, because 1918 was when he came here. Yes.
In those years, he says it was a hard time to live. I
have a portrait of my husband when he was 9 months
old when he came to the United States. Ah, 9 months!
He is 9 months old and my husband is 56 years old. But
they have never gone to see the place because they
Now that they grew up, they don't believe that.
They don't believe that this is just an
imagination of their daddy. They don't believe it
because they've never seen it. But they did see it
because they went to Germany. In 1942, he was in
Africa. He was told by his mother that he ate a lot of
meat. He ate a lot of animals that were as big as a
piece of cloth. He was born here. My husband was
born in 1917 and in 1918
they brought the babies here. But they don't
remember. How did they come here?
Yes. On the train? On the train? To San Antonio.
They came in a truck that this man was a hooker. He
brought people to work and they brought them to San
Antonio. They took the train and got off in Hearn,
in the little depot over there. Yes, we got off
there. We took the train from there. From Laredo.
From Laredo. From Laredo. They took a train. They
took a train that was carrying people from the
smugglers, hidden. He says they came hidden. Yes.
In the train. The train was carrying these hidden
people. They brought them here. Yes. His family
too. His family too. No, in trucks. In trucks. In
trucks. In trucks they brought them to the train.
And the train brought them here. And there were a
lot of people there. where they helped those who
came. It is said that the American government
helped those who were in the war. It is said that
there were those who helped them and they
transported them to places they needed. So he came
here to live in Huylac. He was the first to arrive
there and he built his house there. How many years
did he live in Huylac working? 47 years in
agriculture.
From 1918 to 1947
in Huila. From 1947 to 1973 here. From there to
here, this house. From Mexico they brought it in a
truck, in a train. No, hiding.
Blackmail. What you call not blackmail, but this
was somebody that refugees. Refugees. Refugees,
people that help the other people get to better
places. I wondered if they walked at all from
Bustamante. How did you manage to get from
Bustamante to Laredo? Did you walk? No, no, we
walked. The guys were sick and everything. A
donkey was carrying a donkey walking. They took a
long time to get over there. How long? How long did
it take to get there? No, 18 days. 18 days? Quite a
few days. But they walked for 20 hours. It is said
that they walked and stood up and made firewood and
heated what little they brought. Then another day
they left. 18 days from Bustamante to Laredo. Yes.
No more, no more. It is said that there are not many.
Many people. And many died here. And many who
managed to go back. Yes. And I no longer, I no
longer, I no longer went. A friend of mine told me,
look Melina, My brother Ignacio. He said, they're
taking her away. I said, no. He said, my wife is
here, my wife is here. No, he said, I swear
they're... The men were waiting for her there, the
men who were trying to kill her. I swear they're all
stealing there. They were beating the families,
the people, the boys, the girls. They took them
away. They said it was an evil disorder. They had
their little children. They looked at America and
said, let's go. Yes, there were a lot of them in
other parts. I think you know Mr. Sittek, here in
the court? A.B. Siptak, he was the Sextant
Collector for a long time. Well, he has receipts
from him. He was 18 years old in 1918. We entered the
court and he looked at my wife and everyone and
said, this is my boys, he said. Because he was the
secretary of the bigs, of the bigs, of the rich men,
of the seals. that you call the Seals. They own all
the Frank Seals and all of them. Hombre ricos de
aquí? Hombre ricos de aquí de Huila. Oh, Huila. De
Huila. Seals. Ellos eran, Frank Seals y todos
ellos, los Seals, eran hombres ricos. They own all
the part of the... Well, when they came from
Mexico, they came and built their house with
sieves. They all died. Mr. Siptec was the
secretary because they had a store, and he was the
clerk and secretary. And he still has all the
receipts of the stores that Mr. Siptec built. We
took them to the court because my husband wanted to
be an American citizen because he didn't have
papers. He went to school in Wheelock and had his
report card. We went to the court in Franklin to get
it out and it had a lot of cobwebs and I wanted them to
give it to me. We can photograph it and give it to
you, but we can't give you the
real one.
Are the rich in the United States different from
the rich in Mexico, or are they the same? Are the
rich here like the ones in Mexico, or are the rich
here better than the ones over there? They are the
same. They are the same? They are the same. Over
there, they pay more money. This is the money they
get. But they pay, they buy with the money they
have, they buy from here and so on. Yes, but they say
that you think that the rich here are better than
the rich there because they pay better here than
there. No, because here the state is worth more.
Oh, yes. They say that here the state is worth more
than there. They say that here the state was worth
nothing, it was worth nothing. And now they say
that the money is also worth a lot, there is a lot in
Mexico. Yes. A lot of money. Here came Pedro
Gérard. Yes. He talked to me. He told me, now Mexico
is much better than before. Yes, a lot, a lot of
money. Everything is very expensive, but they
make a lot of money. Yes. Yes, she's from here.
She's from Texas. She's from Texas. And her
parents are from there? No, they're from here. In
Huntsville. Huntsville. She lives about 50 miles
from here. No, but her parents are also from here.
Yes, they're also from here.
But I live here with my family, with my husband and
my children now. She says she lives here in the
school with her husband and his family. Yes. He
worked here for 10 years in the school. He worked
here for 10 years in the house. In what kind of work?
When I came from Juilat, from here I worked. In the
maintenance, keeping the yard clean. Yes, he
worked there. He worked there more than in the
first half of the year. He doesn't look very well.
Yes, he doesn't look very well. Yes, he doesn't
look very well. Yes, he doesn't look very well.
look very well. And she said, what do you want? And I
said, no. And then she said, I didn't look. And I
said, no, then no. Because she wanted to work
there. But I have my citizenship card from school.
And he went to school for five years. And he won his
citizenship card. He says that if he wants to see
his citizenship card. And if you want to see the
citizenship card. Oh, yes. Yes. I want it. And he
studied for five years. A Mexican teacher gave him
the lessons and he learned. And then the
government retired him and gave him his check and
he lived in his house. Here in the United States?
Yes. But in Mexico? No, he didn't have that
protection. There in Mexico, the one who is poor is
poor. In these days? In these days also, because
people on the street ask. They ask for money, they
ask for food, they ask for a little. But here, when
they come from there and look here, they say, here
we don't see men asking for money or women. Because
we took a trip to Monterrey last year, and many
elderly women and many elderly men were asking in
the streets, in the squares, that they wanted
money to heal. They were sick, a lot of them. And
then I say to my wife, we are better because the
government protects all the elderly. We have a
place, a house where all the elderly are, and they
don't beg on the streets or anything like that. And
we like the system because I tell her, it's good
that every Presidente que se sienta, saca unas
buenas ideas como el March of Dimes y todo eso,
ayuda para la nación, para la nación, mejoras para
la gente de la nación. Es lo que yo he visto. Yo no soy
ciudadana, pero yo miro eso y les digo yo, es buen
sistema.
Entre muchos, pónganos monedas y luego se hace
mucho para ayudarles a aquellos para que no anden
mal. In what year did you leave Mexico? In 1926.
With your father? Yes, with my family. My family
left her. And for what reason? For the same reason.
The war? No, the war, it was the war because my
father was also a soldier. But there the soldiers
would chase them because they wanted the soldiers
who had fought to be soldiers in case they were
killed, they didn't have to train the soldier. And
they were already married men. They were already
married men. They were already married men and all
that and they couldn't... Ellos ya no podían andar
en guerra. Ellos querían vivir aparte con sus
familias. Y nosotros éramos muchos niños
también. He estado un problema especial para los
villistas. No, my father never said what they had
in mind, but they wanted all those soldiers to be
together. There was a purpose for another war, so
they all spread out so that there would be no
soldiers or nationals. That's what he did, he took
care of me. Did he hunt you? Yes. It's good. It's
very good. Yes, it's good. Yes, it's always good.
He says that he has all his papers. That's where he
took his citizenship. They had to teach him all of
that book in English and then in Spanish and
explain it to him and everything. And then my
husband also, he did his citizenship with his
papers. Yes. And he says that... Mi esposo dice que
él sabe que es de allá porque le dicen, pero él no
cree porque él nunca vivió, no vivió para
acordarse cómo estuvo la situación. Mi esposo
dice, yo no soy de allá, yo soy de aquí. Pero él sí es
un ciudadano para no estar en dudas.
He was
very hardworking.
This one has papers of more than 50 years. More than
50 years. More than 50 years. It has papers of more
than 50 years. Because all the receipts that Mr.
Zip-Tac gave her are more than 50 years old. From
1918. And all these letters are from way back.
That's what he tells me. He tells me that he has many
things from many years ago.
This one. Here is the year. Yes, 37. 37. But there
are some that are from 1918. Yes. He has them saved.
I don't know where he has them now, but he has them
saved because I haven't seen them. I give them to my
husband. I give him this. These papers are... I
don't know if it was for them, but they used to put
them in an antique or someplace. Yes, an antique.
Or they used to put them in a display, in a bank or
someplace. Let's see, here is a receipt. I don't
know if this receipt will have the date. No, this
one is 60. He must have more. Fine, these samples.
Yes, that's what I tell him, that they are kept as a
treasure.
But he says he was in the war, but he says the war is
bad. The war is bad. He says it destroys the
country, the land, the country, the families, the
states, the children. And for what reason did they
come here?
I started on Soldado.
How did he happen to become a soldier? Oh, he just
come overnight, just like my boys were playing
outside when somebody just said, let's go over
there. And the first day, they start shooting. For
him, there was no training. There was no training.
They just, the civilians, there was no training.
The government was the one that was training.
That's the one that reissued. But these ones, they
were civilians. They have to make their way, most
of the, how they can get out of it. But they didn't
know how. One man, dice él, un hombre decía... The
general said, we are going to fight, and the man
said, and sir, where do we get the carbines? He
said, they are going to lend them to us. They will
not lend them, but he was ignorant. He believed
that the government soldiers were going to lend
them the carbines. They were going to see how many
people they killed to get the carbines from them.
It was a bloody war because they said they had to
kill a lot of people to be able to get weapons. And
because the civilians didn't have weapons. The
government had everything under control. Good
trains, good horses, good everything. Pero luego
ellos pelearon en contra de él. Y entonces le
ganaron al gobierno. Porque casi toda la gente del
gobierno se mató en ese, what you call it, what is it
in English? Le hicimos una trampa. They were
trapped. Trapped.
Y quién es esto? A ver, déjenme.
This is the
Christ
when he was crucified. He was there. He has that
portrait when he was 30 years old. With his wife?
No, the one above is from 30. The one above, when he
was 30 years old. What did the man with the rifle do?
What did he do?
The portrait. He had a portrait of his
brother-in-law dressed as a soldier. In the same
war. He says the portrait is empty. His sister has
the portrait, but it was his brother-in-law. But I
looked at the portrait in a row, a man with a gun. And
your brother-in-law was a soldier with you? Yes,
but he was killed. In the war? He was killed. Others
who fished him, killed him and threw him into a
well. So they saw that that was what they were going
to do to him if he didn't leave. In what year? In
1918. That's when they killed his
brother-in-law.
Petronilo. Petronilo. In what year? In 1918. But
he stayed there. Yes, they had already killed him.
The 18th? Yes, the 18th. They killed him around the
17th? Yes, around the 17th. Around the 17th, they
say they killed him. So he was the one who thought of
running away because all the soldiers who were
there wanted to kill him. No, but I heard him say it.
Well, I don't remember where his mother was. Ah,
yes, Luz. The son of this man lives.
Yes.
And when the soldier was there, he asked
permission and took him away. Because his father
was killed there in 1917. They killed him with a
knife. They killed his father and they killed him.
Just like Cuba did with the Cubans. That's why the
Cubans came here. I know some Cuban men and I've
asked them, well, what made you come here? We've
been running away from that man Castro. That man,
you don't hear or understand, he's a bad man, an
iron hand. Who would think of killing 600 men in one
day? Just him, because his head didn't work for
him. The man was telling us, he was telling us Oh, he
was a minister, he cried and said, why didn't they
go to the United States and kill him? I said, no, we
can't kill another government from another
country because then we put the government on top
of those. He said, well, if I went to the United
States and killed him, why is he the one who is
killing the nation? The man said that many men who
lived here, their children and their parents,
they would tell them, do you remember that guy who
lived there? He was killed by the government. All
the men were killed by the government. And so
that's what made them come here. The Cubans
recognize the same thing as the Mexicans. The same
thing. That man spoke Cuban, but the Cuban
language and ours is almost the same. The same. I
realized that. I understood it well. So I
explained to him why he came. He said, they have a
good deal with Russia. And then Russia is taking
everything away from them. He said he came here to
the house and they took his washing machine, his
washing machine, and everything. He picked up
Castro to take to Russia.